---
layout: post
title: How I Get Value from AI Developer Tools
tags: [Software Engineering, AI]
---
<script> 
  (function(i,s,o,g,r,a,m){i['GoogleAnalyticsObject']=r;i[r]=i[r]||function(){
  (i[r].q=i[r].q||[]).push(arguments)},i[r].l=1*new Date();a=s.createElement(o),
  m=s.getElementsByTagName(o)[0];a.async=1;a.src=g;m.parentNode.insertBefore(a,m)
  })(window,document,'script','https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js','ga');

  ga('create', 'UA-82391879-1', 'auto');
  ga('send', 'pageview');

</script>


Software engineering is changing. From autocomplete to chat-based code generators to no-code platforms, AI tools arrived like a tsunami in 2024. 

It's true that most software development work - especially for engineers working on distributed systems backed by large custom codebases - remains above the waterline. Smart autocomplete and agentic code composers are not going to help you debug that noisy pager about the dead letter queue (not in January 2025 anyway). 

But AI tools make certain tasks 10x faster. Custom user interfaces, data transformations, simple automations, testing utilities - anything standalone with a high context switching cost is way easier to do without AI. We can get the most from these tools when we change how we work to do these tasks more often.

I recently built a system that opened each url in a list, performed a few actions, took a screenshot of the page, and wrote the screenshot to s3. The screenshots would be picked up by another system and displayed to a user.

As I debugged the system, I realized I was spending a lot of time downloading and opening the screenshots one-by-one. The optimal developer experience would have been for the system to generate a visualization of urls side-by-side with screenshots and open it as a pdf on my machine.

This wouldn't be too hard to build - we could format text side-by-side with images in HTML and then convert the HTML page to a pdf for easier viewing. In a pre-LLM coding world I probably wouldn't have taken the time to build this - too much boilerplate code and unfamiliar APIs - but cursor composer got the job done perfectly in a few minutes.

I think the real insight here isn't that AI will do your work for you, or even make it easier directly. But there's probably a host of standalone ancillary tasks that would make your life better if someone did them. These are a lot easier now, and the engineers who embrace this will spend less time context switching or repeating menial work and more time shipping value. 












